Daniel Holmgren: Hey, everybody
.
My name is Daniel Holmgren.
I'm the head of protocol at Blue Sky.
Just a heads up, I've been losing my voice all
week.
I thought maybe if I drank six Modellos at the
after party last night, that would loosen it up.
And the jury's out on if that's working or not
.
So I'm hoping that I'm good for this talk.
To tell you a little bit about, so I lead protocol
development and design at Blue Sky.
To tell you a little bit about our team, right now
it's technically just me and Brian Newbold on it,
although we collaborate closely with other folks from the Atmosphere
team.
Without going into our whole org structure, the reason that we
split out this protocol department is that protocol design and governance just
looks pretty different from running a startup.
You want to make slower intentional decisions and you don't want
it to get caught up in sort of the market and the
product life cycle of the startup.
So we put up a little bit of a internal firewall for
that department so we can go a little bit slower and we
can be focused on what we really care about with the protocol
, which is the emergence of a functioning, resilient, multi
-stakeholder atmosphere.
So I want to start with the provocation, which is
that it's logically impossible for Blue Sky to decentralize the
network.
We really want the network to be decentralized.
It is impossible for us to do it because we are the
party, right?
And even if we funded somebody else to do it, they
're still downstream of us and it's not actually, do
they actually have the authority?
Do they actually have the power?
We're the central entity.
We can't decentralize it.
We can provide the tools and structures by which to decentralize
it, but we need others to use those tools and structures
to take control, power, and authority in the network to
actually make this a resilient multi-stakeholder network.
So that's what I'm going to be talking about today
is those tools and structures and how we address that.
The agenda is pretty brief.
We're going to talk about the IETF, some
recent developments with PLC governance, and then hard decentralization
, which is kind of getting into the actual threats of what
having a big entity in the middle of the ecosystem could do
.
Before we do that, I'm on the big stage and
I wanted to talk about the real governance question, which is
how do we capitalize and stylize AT protocol?
Again, this is a multi-stakeholder network,
so this is just my opinion.
It just happens to be the correct opinion.
You can see AT protocol, at proto, all lowercase
, not a capital A, and atmosphere.
The rest of these are out, especially capital A, capital
T, capital P, proto.
That one is terrible, and it needs to be killed.
Okay, now onto the real stuff.
Talking about the IETF, or who gets to decide
what the protocol actually is.
So, what is the IETF?
It's the Internet Engineering Task Force.
It's the standards body for the Internet.
It standardized all the protocols that you know and love.
I'm sure that you're familiar with a lot of these
.
SMTP for email, HTTP for the web, TLS
, it gives you the little green lock that tells you that
your website's secure, web sockets, OAuth,
and more.
To tell you a little bit
about the vibe of the IETF, it's a
pretty weird, idiosyncratic organization.
I have a quote here from Snarf that I think captures
it pretty well.
He said, standards bodies or bureaucracy for good, which I
think sums it up.
It's pretty bureaucratic, it's pretty pedantic,
but it's ultimately a very idealistic organization.
And it's a very neutral, credible body, and they
do a very good job sort of stewarding and owning
these sorts of Internet protocols.
So, it's a mix of institutional, but it's
also grassroots.
You kind of have like a lot of old Internet heads there
, you have activists, you have academics and researchers, you
also have folks from the big tech companies that are Google and
Cloudflare and others.
And that also gives it this mix of idealism and prag
matism.
People have conversations about keeping the Internet decentralized, but also they
care a lot about the Internet working well.
And so they have this very pragmatic approach.
The kind of motto there is that decisions are made by rough
consensus and working code, which I think actually gives a good
sense of that idealism and pragmatism.
They want to see something working and they want to get a
bunch of diverse voices in the room and have general agreement on
it.
It's open membership.
Anybody can join.
You don't need to pay money to join.
You can just hop in the mailing list, start participating.
You can show up to meetings and start participating.
And companies are not members of it.
Individuals are members.
And I put kind of here because most people have an affili
ation with a company and it's like they kind of where
it's pretty clear that they are affiliated with companies.
But it is still it kind of gets at their ethos
in a way, which is that these are these are engineers
coming together trying to reach consensus on protocols.
So the exciting news is we have a working group at the
IETF.
Also huge kudos to Brian on that.
Brian really let up the standards work.
In all honesty, he should be the one up here presenting
all of this.
He's just done an incredible job at that.
The working group is called Authenticated Transfer or ATP.
This is the URL for it.
The responsible area director is Andy Newton.
The working group chairs are Shu Ping Peng and Mallory N
odell.
Brian and I got the chance to chat with all three of
these folks earlier this week.
Generally got very good vibes from them.
They're ready to hit the ground running.
They're kind of like start engaging on the mailing list,
draft up some stuff.
We want to have a lot of energy at the first meeting
.
So the vibes were good.
I'm excited about this.
This is our charter in very small font.
You can read the entire thing on the IETF data
tracker.
This was on the note of bureaucracy for good.
This was four months of going back and forth on a mailing
list to get that nailed down to decide what we were going
to work on.
And to break down kind of what's in that, what
the charter for this working group is for is the structure of
the repo and how we encode records in it, the
sync protocol for public repositories, the AT URI scheme
for addressing records in those repositories, and then interface requirements
and selection criteria for an identifier resolution system.
This was kind of the hardest part of nailing down the
charter, which is that we did not want to pull d
ids into the IETF.
We did not want to wade into the quagm
ire of specifying identity.
So we kind of, there's an identity-shaped hole
in the spec, and we're specifying the shape of
that hole.
We are not going to be, this working group is not
going to be doing lexicon, any microblogging
, or social semantics at all.
Identity, as I mentioned, labeling, and the permission
data work that we're working on right now is outside of
the working group as well.
Though, parts of this may, we may recharter
the work, if everything goes well for both parties, we
may recharter the working group in the future and address
some of these.
So, just to call it out, this is your chance
to contribute to the technical direction of the protocol.
As I said, this is open membership, anybody can hop
in here.
If you think that we screwed it up and the protocol is
stupid or ugly or whatever, this is your chance to say
it and actually have an impact on the protocol.
You, in some very real sense, you are on an
equal playing field as Brian or I on that mailing list and
in that room.
So, just to give you a sense for participation, as
I said, anyone can participate.
There's three in-person meetings a year, one in
North America, one in Europe, and one in Asia generally
.
They have a very good remote-first experience, and usually
if you're attending remote and only for one day, they
'll give you a free ticket.
So, that is great.
The first working group meeting will probably be at IETF
126 in Vienna, which is this summer, July.
We may do a remote interim meeting beforehand, and I will
keep people updated on that.
But regardless, follow along on the mailing list.
It's atp@ietf.
org.
Brian and I are going to be trying to send out some
stuff on there somewhat soon.
So, hop in and let us know your thoughts.
Okay, on to the next one.
PLC, or what about that centralized server at the bottom
of the stack?
For those that don't know, PLC is the identifier
, not identity, the identifier system for the AT protocol.
It's where your keys are stored, or yeah, it
describes your public keys and your service endpoints.
And it's kind of the centralized server run by Blue Sky
right now at the bottom of the stack.
My odd take is PLC isn't that bad.
The threat model is actually pretty limited.
Everything is cryptographically signed.
The threat model of whoever is running the PLC directory,
what they can get away with, is not that much.
They can't arbitrarily change your identity or anything like that
.
They can essentially do denial of service attacks, removing operations from
your identity, or refusing to serve your identity.
Those aren't good, but just to note the threat model
is pretty limited.
All that being said, it still needs some work.
And so we're sort of thinking about maturing governance of
PLC as we go along.
We'd like to use DNS and ICANN as an
example, mostly for an analogy of iterative maturation of
governance.
DNS has issues, ICANN has issues, don't
overthink the analogy, but you can kind of see how
DNS evolved over time.
It started as a text file that got distributed to different hosts
in the network, moved to a single server that was a
computer under the desk, transitioned to multiple root servers.
ICANN got set up as a governance body for it
, and ICANN continues to evolve in their governance,
being more and more multi-stakeholder, taking into
account other countries outside of the U.
S.
more.
And so this is sort of the model that we look at
with PLC is, you know, like we don't
have to get it to the end state of like, this
is the perfect PLC forever or something tomorrow.
It's how can we iteratively move that forward as the
like kind of threat model for the atmosphere evolves.
So the exciting news to announce is that public ledger of
credentials organization has officially been founded as a Swiss association.
Again,
huge kudos to Brian for leading this up as well as
Matt, our head of legal, which if you guys can
find, I don't know if Matt's here, but
if you guys can find Matt, you should talk to Matt
.
He's like protocol-pilled now, it's very
fun.
So we put a lot of thought into who is going to
be on the board for PLC.
Like we wanted a board that people in the ecosystem could really
trust to run this thing, and I think that we found
the perfect one, which is, it's just going to
be Roscoe.
I think Roscoe is just going to run this.
No, I'm kidding about that.
This is going to be the actual board for the PLC
association.
There's five members.
Brian, who is on the Blue Sky team.
He's a protocol engineer on the Blue Sky team.
He's the best person from the PLC or from the
Blue Sky team for this.
Richard Barnes, he's the co-founder of Let's
Encrypt, which has some analogies to PLC
.
It looks pretty similar to PLC.
He's also the co-author of the MLS,
Acme, HPKE, all of these deep crypto I
ETF specifications.
Wendy Seltzer, who's an internet lawyer and open
standards advocate.
She's here at the conference.
You should find her and talk to her if you're interested
.
Filippo Valsorda, who's a crypt
ographer.
He maintains the Go Cryptography Library, and he's also
a transparency log aficionado and is working on the
Project Sunlight implementation.
He is also here at the conference.
You should come talk to him.
And then Tyla, and I don't know how to
pronounce her last name, unfortunately, but she's a crypt
ographer and a security and privacy engineer at Google.
She also lives in Switzerland, which is quite nice for organizational
reasons.
Yeah, so just to note again, this is like the
first step in the evolution of PLC.
This isn't the end state of it.
We're going to continue working on this.
We also haven't actually transferred any assets over to PLC
.
That is something that we'll be doing in the coming months
, and we'll give updates as that happens.
The first order of business is getting the domain name over to
PLC.
Alongside these organizational improvements, we also have some technical improvements
to PLC.
We ship streaming replication and a replica reference implementation that provides full
verification of all directory operations.
There's a number of people that are running this in the
network already.
And the longer-term plan is a sophistication of that
, which is transparency logs.
And you know that we're going to do that because we
have Filippo on the board.
Great.
Now, so those are sort of like the governance updates on
like kind of these core parts of the protocol.
This next section is about hard decentralization, or that's
great and all, but what happens when blue sky kills API
access?
Or servers are actually just physical objects that can be destroyed,
unplugged, or seized.
This is kind of the real politic of running a multi-
stakeholder network where you have one big person at the
center of it.
What are the particular threats, and what can they get away
with?
So, I want to call out that decentralization isn't
just one thing, and we need to think through what those
threats actually are.
Numbers are important, but I'm somewhat uninterested in
like what percentage of people are on what thing or what.
It's what are the actual threats that come from blue sky
being outsized in this ecosystem.
Let's think through those threats, and think through how blue
sky can address them, and how the network can address them
.
So, we're going to do some threat modeling on what
blue sky could do, and then we're going to talk
through some of the solutions.
So, the most common thing that people think of is blue
sky shuts down AppView API access.
People are familiar with this because a lot of social companies in
the past have done it.
This is actually sort of the threat that I'm least concerned
about, because data access is guaranteed by the open hosting PD
S layer.
As long as the hosting layer, the network inherits its
openness from the PDS layer, and as long as the
hosting layer remains locked open, then these other AppView implement
ations can emerge as the need arises.
I've somewhat jokingly in the past called this lazy decentral
ization, that it's if you trust that the hosting layer
is open, then you don't need to decentralize the
app layer yet.
But you have to trust that the hosting layer is open,
and we'll talk about that in a second.
Still, the things that we need for this are tools for
backfilling the network, and syncing the network,
and also AppView implementation code.
So, now to talk about if we screwed up the hosting
layer, this would be blue sky shutting down access to the
PDS, or access to the open data that's hosted
by the PDS.
To note, blue sky, if blue sky were to do
this, it destroys all of the feeds, apps, and
labelers running on the protocol.
So, the pain of destroying the network of open applications needs
to be severe enough that blue sky cannot consider shutting down our
PDS access.
A smaller version of this attack would be blue sky may stop
serving data to particular competitors.
So, if one big competitor emerges in the ecosystem, maybe
we keep sharing data to all of the feeds and labelers
out there, but we cut off access to that one larger
competitor.
The things that we need to prevent this are a thriving network
built on open data.
If people are relying on open data, then we're incentiv
ized to not cut off access to it.
And then, specifically on this cutting off access to particular competitors
, all of the data is signed and rebroadcastable
.
That means that you can get it from any source.
You can get it from the blue sky PDS, or
you can get it from another PDS.
So, we need multiple sources to get data from.
The next sort of threat is blue sky stops crawling non-
blue sky PDSs.
So, these are folks that have migrated their account off of
the blue sky PDS, and the blue sky app view
stops indexing non-blue sky PDS data.
Their motivation to do that would be to monopolize hosting.
What we need to prevent this is a critical mass of users
on non-blue sky PDSs, and other applications
that do index non-blue sky PDS data.
And that, I want to call out that critical mass,
basically we need the critical mass, because if blue sky were
to stop indexing this, you needed to screw up people
's experience of the app, and they would get pissed because
there's data that they want to see that they're not
seeing in the blue sky app.
I want to call out that I don't think that we
need like an even distribution of users across hosting infrastructure in the
network in order to achieve this.
You can imagine 5% of the network, even less than
that.
If it's an important 5% of the network, that
would be disruptive enough that if you cut off access to them
, people would be upset and leave the blue sky app.
This threat also becomes much less substantial if people can just go
to another app that is indexing both blue sky content,
and content from non-blue sky PDSs.
So having other applications in the network helps prevent this threat.
Another threat is blue sky messing with accounts.
Examples of this are preventing users from migrating between PDS
s, de-platforming users, especially if we don
't have Just Cause, preventing users from using certain apps or
competitors.
The things that we need to prevent this are basically account recovery
or export tools.
So backups of repositories if blue sky is refusing to serve
your repository to you.
User held recovery keys in case blue sky is refusing to sign
account migration operations on your behalf.
And then just a place to go.
Non-blue sky PDS is running in the network that
you can migrate to.
And then the final threat is blue sky just losing access to
accounts.
This may be sort of out of ill intentions or this may
be external forces.
So going out of business, you know, a data center
blowing up, legal action, servers getting seized, something like
that.
I would expect in most cases blue sky should be able to
help ease this transition.
For instance, like the most likely one of these is probably
blue sky going out of business.
And we should be able to help ease the transition if that
were the case.
Even if we stop providing PDS services, it's very
cheap for us to keep some PDS's online and rotation
keys as people move off.
In extreme cases where blue sky is refusing to do that or
unable to do it for some reason, we essentially need what
we got from the last threat, which is backups of reposit
ories and user held recovery keys.
So pulling out the things that we found that we needed for
each of these, it's basically app view implementation and sync
tooling.
Nice.
More users on non-blue sky PDS's, so
a more diverse open data hosting layer.
Consumer key management and recovery tools, putting rotation keys in the
hands of users.
Other data sources and backups for repositories.
And then a thriving ecosystem built on open data.
So I want to walk through each one of these and talk
about what the blue sky team can do, what we are
doing, and then what folks in the ecosystem can do if
you're concerned about these particular threats.
So, first on app view implementation and sync
.
Relays are cheap now.
With sync 1.
1, FIG is running a relay for under $5
a month.
That's awesome.
There's over 10 full network relays running in the network
.
We seem to be getting pretty good at doing this one.
So you can get your data from a lot of different sources
.
There's lots of new sync tools coming out.
We published tap, hydrant, the entire FIG proto
microcosm universe is helping with sync.
And then black sky is actually running a full network app view
, which is incredible.
So in some sense, I kind of think this one's
solved, although we can always do better on it.
But there's also novel approaches like red dwarf that provide a
blue sky like experience with no app view.
And so there's ways to rethink what this looks like in
the network where maybe, I think it's amazing that black
sky is running a full network app view.
I think that you can probably provide blue sky like experiences for
significantly cheaper if you make certain trade offs in how you construct
this.
The next one, Cuba joked that we should take a
shot every time this graph is showed at the conference.
And I told him I got one more for him.
The next one is more users on non blue sky PDS
s.
This is a graph of weekly users posting from non blue sky
PDSs.
And you can see that the trend line is pretty good.
So in some sense, we just got to keep cooking on
this and doing what we're doing.
What blue sky, what we can do and what we're
planning to do to help with this is putting an account migration
UI in the PDS.
We think that users, especially non technical users, probably just
have a better trust relationship with the blue sky PDS.
Or yeah, with the blue sky PDS and would trust
an account migration UI there a little bit more to get over
to non blue sky PDS hosting.
We want to improve the PDS distribution, especially for mid
-sized deployments, things in the 1,000 to
100,000 user range.
Right now it works pretty well for self-hosters and
small groups of people.
It's a little bit of a pain for mid-sized
deployments.
And we also want to make the relay more self-s
erve, both for third party relays, so that it
's easier for them to get proactive write notifications whenever PDS
is right.
But also for our relay doing dynamic rate limits so that you
guys don't have to DM us whenever you run into that
and you get cut off from the relay.
What you all can do for this to improve this is keep
cooking and also backup and recovery systems.
We talked about backup and recovery systems in the context of sort
of blue sky threatening people's repositories and keys.
But it's also important for migrating off to non blue
sky PDS's because you don't necessarily, you know
, you're taking on an operational risk whenever you do that
.
You kind of know blue sky has money and you know how
we operate stuff and you know that we're probably keeping your
data secure.
Whenever you move to another PDS or even self-host
ing, you take on some operational risk and having backup and
recovery systems can give you peace of mind to do that.
The next thing that we call that was other data sources and
backups for repositories.
Phil, Fig, bad example, just announced Hubble, which
is funded via a grant from blue sky.
I'm super stoked about this project.
Hubble's a full network mirror of public repositories.
The relay used to offer this whenever we switched to sync 1
.
1.
It no longer mirrors all the public repositories in the network
.
And so this provides a full network copy of all of the
data.
It's intended to increase network resilience.
This is a backup of your repository.
If your PDS crashes and burns and you lose your repository
, you can go get it from here.
If blue sky tries to lock you out of it, you
can go get a backup of your repository here.
Or if blue sky shuts down our APIs, then you can
go sync repositories from Hubble.
All of the code will be open source and permissibly
licensed.
Phil's planning on running an instance of this, but anybody
can run an instance of this and provide a full network mirror
.
Consumer key management and recovery tools.
I actually think that there's a really great product opportunity here
.
And I'm kind of surprised that nobody's done it.
You can take advantage of phone TPMs for storing recovery
keys in a very secure way.
This application could also audit PLC and notify users of any
unexpected operations.
And just to note, I also think that this would partner
well with a backup or recovery service.
Especially whenever we put out permission data.
And then the final thing is just a thriving ecosystem built on
open data.
And this is, I think, the biggest part where you
all come in.
Apps built on the atmosphere, atmospheric websites, feeds, label
ers, social media tools.
Anything that requires that the data be open.
In some sense, all of the previous threats that we talked
about are, they're pretty protocol brained.
And I just don't think a lot of users are going
to care or engage about that.
And I don't think that we're going to get to
like an even distribution of users by focusing on key recovery or
non blue sky PDS's or anything like that.
The most important thing for the resilience of the network is that
users need to understand that they're participating in a multi-
stakeholder network.
That they're participating in the atmosphere.
That they're not participating in blue sky.
And so if we're building things that run on open data
and users fall in love with open social.
And these experiences that you can only build on open data.
That is the most important thing that we can do to keep
blue sky honest.
And to keep the open social web running.
So the best way to ensure the resilience of the network is
to build something that people love so much that they would revolt
if it ever went away.
Sweet.
Thank you.
That's great.
It's awesome.
We should get that done probably by next week, week after
next.
So it's great.
Easy.
We're heading into the coffee break and we have a couple
of minutes.
Questions?
So users knowing that they're participating in the atmosphere
and not just blue sky.
How do we do it?
What's the branding?
That's a great question and we should figure that out.
This gentleman just showed you an ASCII presentation.
This presentation came from our designer.
I want to call that out.
No, that's a good question.
I think that that is, I mean I don't have
the answer for you right now.
But that is the core question that we need to figure out
this year.
Is how do we start to build intuition for users about what
the atmosphere is.
What they're participating in.
What an atmosphere count is.
And what this whole open social thing is about.
How is the Swiss Association funded?
Is that like a grant from blue sky?
And how does this thing continue even if one of your scenarios
, blue skies, went away?
That's a good question.
Right now it is funded via a grant from blue sky.
The exact details of that haven't been nailed down just yet
.
Although it will probably provide some sort of ongoing funding.
And then the association is going to be working to provide more
sustainable funding options after that.
But ultimately that's going to be the prerogative
of the Swiss Association.
Not blue sky.
Let's go get some coffee.
Thanks Dan.